# (no title)
URL: https://www.indiacode.nic.in/bitstream/123456789/1522/1/a1955-57.pdf

1
THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955
____________
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
____________
SECTIONS
1. Short title.
2. Interpretation.
ACQUISITION OF CITIZENSHIP
3. Citizenship by birth.
4. Citizenship by descent.
5. Citizenship by registration.
6. Citizenship by naturalization.
6A. Special provisions as to citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord.
6B. Special provisions as to citizenship of person covered by proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (1) 
of section 2.
7. Citizenship by incorporation of territory.
OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP
7A. Registration of Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.
7B. Conferment of rights on Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.
7C. Renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India Card.
7D. Cancellation of registration as Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.
TERMINATION OF CITIZENSHIP
8. Renunciation of citizenship.
9. Termination of citizenship.
10. Deprivation of citizenship.
SUPPLEMENTAL
11. [Omitted.].
12. [Omitted.].
13. Certificate of Citizenship in case of doubt.
14. Disposal of application under sections 5, 6 and 7A.
14A. Issue of national identity cards.
15. Revision.
15A. Review.
16. Delegation of powers.
17. Offences.
2
SECTIONS
18. Power to make rules.
19. [Repealed.].
[THE FIRST SCHEDULE.] [Omitted.].
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.
[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.] [Omitted.].
3
THE CITIZENSHIP ACT, 1955
ACT No. 57 OF 19551
[30th December, 1955.]
An Act to provide for the acquisition and determination of Indian citizenship.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows:―
1. Short title.―This Act may be called the Citizenship Act, 1955.
2. Interpretation.―(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,―
(a) “a Government in India” means the Central Government or a State Government.
2
[(b) “illegal migrant” means a foreigner who has entered into India―
(i) without a valid passport or other travel documents and such other document or authority as 
may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf; or 
(ii) with a valid passport or other travel documents and such other document or authority as 
may be prescribed by or under any law in that behalf but remains therein beyond the permitted 
period of time;]
3
[Provided that any person belonging to Hindu, Sikh, Buddhist, Jain, Parsi or Christian 
community from Afghanistan, Bangladesh or Pakistan, who entered into India on or before the 
31st day of December, 2014 and who has been exempted by the Central Government by or under 
clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 3 of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 (34 of 1920) 
or from the application of the provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) or any rule or 
order made there under, shall not be treated as illegal migrant for the purposes of this Act;]
(d) “Indian consulate” means the office of any consular officer of the Government of India where 
a register of births is kept, or where there is no such office, such office as may be prescribed;
(e) “minor” means a person who has not attained the age of eighteen years;
4
[(ee) “Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder” means a person registered as an Overseas Citizen 
of India Cardholder by the Central Government under section 7A;]
(f) “person” does not include any company or association or body of individuals, whether 
incorporated or not;
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;
5
* * * * *
(h) “undivided India” means India as defined in the Government of India Act, 1935, as originally 
enacted.
(2) For the purposes of this Act, a person born aboard a registered ship or aircraft, or aboard an 
unregistered ship or aircraft of the government of any country, shall be deemed to have been born in the 
place in which the ship or aircraft was registered or, as the case may be, in that country.
(3) Any reference in this Act to the status or description of the father of a person at the time of that 
person's birth shall, in relation to a person born after the death of his father, be construed as a reference to 
the status or description of the father at the time of the father's death; and where that death occurred 
 
 1. This Act has been extended to the Union territory of Dadra and Nagar haveli, vide Notification No. S.O. 846, dated 17-3-
1962, Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3(ii), page 517. The Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu vide 
Notification No. S.O. 847, dated 17-3-1962, see ibid., and to Pondicherry with modification vide Notification No. G.S.R. 
1557, dated 24-11-1962, Gazette of India, Part II, section 3(i).
 2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 2, for clauses (b) and (c) (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
3. Ins. by Act 47 of 2019, s. 2 (w.e.f. 10-1-2020).
 4. Subs. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 2, for clause (ee) (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
 5. Omitted by Act 32 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28-6-2005).
4
before, and the birth occurs after, the commencement of this Act, the status or description which would 
have been applicable to the father had he died after the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be 
the status or description applicable to him at the time of his death.
(4) For the purposes of this Act, a person shall be deemed to be of full age if he is not a minor and of 
full capacity if he is not of unsound mind.
ACQUISITION OF CITIZENSHIP
1
[3. Citizenship by birth.―(1) Except as provided in sub-section (2), every person born in India―
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 1st day of July, 1987;
(b) on or after the 1st day of July, 1987, but before the commencement of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 2004) and either of whose parents is a citizen of India at the time of his 
birth;
(c) on or after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 2004), 
where―
(i) both of his parents are citizens of India; or
(ii) one of whose parents is a citizen of India and the other is not an illegal migrant at the time 
of his birth,
shall be a citizen of India by birth.
(2) A person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section if at the time of his birth―
(a) either his father or mother possesses such immunity from suits and legal process as is 
accorded to an envoy of a foreign sovereign power accredited to the President of India and he or she, 
as the case may be, is not a citizen of India; or
(b) his father or mother is an enemy alien and the birth occurs in a place then under occupation by 
the enemy.]
4. Citizenship by descent.―2[(1) A person born outside India shall be a citizen of India by 
descent,―
(a) on or after the 26th day of January, 1950, but before the 10th day of December, 1992, if his 
father is a citizen of India at the time of his birth; or
(b) on or after the 10th day of December, 1992, if either of his parents is a citizen of India at the 
time of his birth:
Provided that if the father of a person referred to in clause (a) was a citizen of India by descent only, 
that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section unless―
(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its occurrence or the 
commencement of this Act, whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central Government, 
after the expiry of the said period; or
(b) his father is, at the time of his birth, in service under a Government in India:
Provided further that if either of the parents of a person referred to in clause (b) was a citizen of India 
by descent only, that person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section, unless―
(a) his birth is registered at an Indian consulate within one year of its occurrence or on or after the 
10th day of December, 1992, whichever is later, or, with the permission of the Central Government, 
after the expiry of the said period; or
(b) either of his parents is, at the time of his birth, in service under a Government in India:
 
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 3, for section 3 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004). 
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
5
Provided also that on or after the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 
(6 of 2004), a person shall not be a citizen of India by virtue of this section, unless his birth is registered at 
an Indian consulate in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed,―
(i) within one year of its occurrence or the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 
2003(6 of 2004), whichever is later; or
(ii) with the permission of the Central Government, after the expiry of the said period:
Provided also that no such birth shall be registered unless the parents of such person declare, in such 
form and in such manner as may be prescribed, that the minor does not hold the passport of another 
country.
(1A) A minor who is a citizen of India by virtue of this section and is also a citizen of any other 
country shall cease to be a citizen of India if he does not renounce the citizenship or nationality of another 
country within six months of attaining full age.]
(2) If the Central Government so directs, a birth shall be deemed for the purposes of this section to 
have been registered with its permission, notwithstanding that its permission was not obtained before the 
registration.
(3) For the purposes of the proviso to sub-section (1), 1[any person] born outside undivided India who 
was, or was deemed to be, a citizen of India at the commencement of the Constitution shall be deemed to 
be a citizen of India by descent only.
5. Citizenship by registration.―2[(1) Subject to the provisions of this section and such other 
conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Central Government may, on an application made in 
this behalf, register as a citizen of India any person not being an illegal migrant who is not already such 
citizen by virtue of the Constitution or of any other provision of this Act if he belongs to any of the 
following categories, namely:―
(a) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in India for seven years before making an
application for registration;
(b) a person of Indian origin who is ordinarily resident in any country or place outside undivided 
India;
(c) a person who is married to a citizen of India and is ordinarily resident in India for seven 
years before making an application for registration;
(d) minor children of persons who are citizens of India;
(e) a person of full age and capacity whose parents are registered as citizens of India under 
clause (a) of this sub-section or sub-section (1) of section 6;
(f) a person of full age and capacity who, or either of his parents, was earlier citizen of 
independent India, and 3[is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months] immediately before making 
an application for registration;
(g) a person of full age and capacity who has been registered as an 4[Overseas Citizen of India 
Cardholder] for five years, and who 5[is ordinarily resident in India for twelve months] before making 
an application for registration.
Explanation 1.―For the purposes of clauses (a) and (c), an applicant shall be deemed to be ordinarily 
resident in India if―
(i) he has resided in India throughout the period of twelve months immediately before making an 
application for registration; and
(ii) he has resided in India during the eight years immediately preceding the said period of twelve 
months for a period of not less than six years.
 
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 1992, s. 2, for “any male person”.
2. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 5, for sub-section (1) (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 3, for “has been residing in India for one year” (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “Overseas Citizen of India” (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “has been residing in India for one year” (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
6
Explanation 2.―For the purposes of this sub-section, a person shall be deemed to be of Indian origin 
if he, or either of his parents, was born in undivided India or in such other territory which became part of 
India after the 15th day of August, 1947.]
1
[(1A) The Central Government, if it is satisfied that special circumstances exist, may after recording 
the circumstances in writing, relax the period of twelve months, specified in clauses (f) and (g) and clause 
(i) of Explanation 1 of sub-section (1), up to a maximum of thirty days which may be in different breaks.]
(2) No person being of full age shall be registered as a citizen of India under sub-section (1) until he 
has taken the oath of allegiance in the form specified in the Second Schedule.
(3) No person who has renounced, or has been deprived of, his Indian citizenship or whose Indian 
citizenship has terminated, under this Act shall be registered as a citizen of India under sub-section (1) 
except by order of the Central Government.
(4) The Central Government may, if satisfied that there are special circumstances justifying such 
registration, cause any minor to be registered as a citizen of India.
(5) A person registered under this section shall be a citizen of India by registration as from the date on 
which he is so registered; and a person registered under the provisions of clause (b)(ii) of article 6 or 
article 8 of the Constitution shall be deemed to be a citizen of India by registration as from the 
commencement of the Constitution or the date on which he was so registered, whichever may be later.
2
[(6) If the Central Government is satisfied that circumstances exist which render it necessary to grant 
exemption from the residential requirement under clause (c) of sub-section (1) to any person or a class of 
persons, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, grant such exemption.].
6. Citizenship by naturalisation.―(1) Where an application is made in the prescribed manner by 
any person of full age and capacity 3[not being an illegal migrant] for the grant of a certificate of 
naturalisation to him, the Central Government may, if satisfied that the applicant is qualified for
naturalisation under the provisions of the Third Schedule, grant to him a certificate of naturalisation:
Provided that, if in the opinion of the Central Government, the applicant is a person who has rendered 
distinguished service to the cause of science, philosophy, art, literature, world peace or human progress 
generally, it may waive all or any of the conditions specified in the Third Schedule.
(2) The person to whom a certificate of naturalisation is granted under sub-section (1) shall, on taking 
the oath of allegiance in the form specified in the Second Schedule, be a citizen of India by naturalisation 
as from the date on which that certificate is granted.
4
[6A. Special provisions as to citizenship of persons covered by the Assam Accord.―(1) For the 
purposes of this section―
(a) “Assam” means the territories included in the State of Assam immediately before the 
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985);
(b) “detected to be a foreigner” means detected to be a foreigner in accordance with the 
provisions of the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) and the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 by a 
Tribunal constituted under the said Order;
(c) “specified territory” means the territories included in Bangladesh immediately before the 
commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985);
(d) a person shall be deemed to be Indian origin, if he, or either of his parents or any of his 
grandparents was born in undivided India;
 
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 3 (w.e.f. 6-1-2015). 
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 5 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “who is not a citizen of a country specified in the First Schedule” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
4. Ins. by Act 65 of 1985, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7-12-1985). 
7
(e) a person shall be deemed to have been detected to be a foreigner on the date on which a 
Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 submits its opinion to the effect 
that he is a foreigner to the officer or authority concerned.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), all persons of Indian origin who came before 
the lst day of January, 1966 to Assam from the specified territory (including such of those whose names 
were included in the electoral rolls used for the purposes of the General Election to the House of the 
People held in 1967) and who have been ordinarily resident in Assam since the dates of their entry into 
Assam shall be deemed to be citizens of India as from the lst day of January, 1966.
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-sections (6) and (7), every person of Indian origin who―
(a) came to Assam on or after the lst day of January, 1966 but before the 25th day of March, 1971 
from the specified territory; and
(b) has, since the date of his entry into Assam, been ordinarily resident in Assam; and
(c) has been detected to be a foreigner;
shall register himself in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government in this behalf under 
section 18 with such authority (hereafter in this sub-section referred to as the registering authority) as may 
be specified in such rules and if his name is included in any electoral roll for any Assembly or 
Parliamentary constituency in force on the date of such detection, his name shall be deleted therefrom.
Explanation.―In the case of every person seeking registration under this sub-section, the opinion of 
the Tribunal constituted under the Foreigners (Tribunals) Order, 1964 holding such person to be a 
foreigner, shall be deemed to be sufficient proof of the requirement under clause (c) of this sub-section 
and if any question arises as to whether such person complies with any other requirement under this subsection, the registering authority shall,―
(i) if such opinion contains a finding with respect to such other requirement, decide the question 
in conformity with such finding;
(ii) if such opinion does not contain a finding with respect to such other requirement, refer the 
question to a Tribunal constituted under the said Order hang jurisdiction in accordance with such 
rules as the Central Government may make in this behalf under section 18 and decide the question in 
conformity with the opinion received on such reference.
(4) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall have, as from the date on which he has been 
detected to be a foreigner and till the expiry of a period of ten years from that date, the same rights and 
obligations as a citizen of India (including the right to obtain a passport under the Passports Act, 1967 (15 
of 1967) and the obligations connected therewith), but shall not entitled to have his name included in any 
electoral roll for any Assembly or Parliamentary constituency at any time before the expiry of the said 
period of ten years.
(5) A person registered under sub-section (3) shall be deemed to be a citizen of India for all purposes 
as from the date of expiry of a period of ten years from the date on which he has been detected to be a 
foreigner.
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 8―
(a) if any person referred to in sub-section (2) submits in the prescribed manner and form and to 
the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 of 1985), a declaration that he does not wish to be a citizen of India, 
such person shall not be deemed to have become a citizen of India under that sub-section;
(b) if any person referred to in sub-section (3) submits in the prescribed manner and form and to 
the prescribed authority within sixty days from the date of commencement of the Citizenship 
(Amendment) Act, 1985(65 of 1985), or from the date on which he has been detected to be a 
foreigner, whichever is later, a declaration that he does not wish to be governed by the provisions of 
that sub-section and sub-sections (4) and (5), it shall not be necessary for such person to register 
himself under sub-section (3).
8
Explanation.―Where a person required to file a declaration under this sub-section does not have the 
capacity to enter into a contract, such declaration may be filed on his behalf by any person competent 
under the law for the time being in force to act on his behalf.
(7) Nothing in sub-sections (2) to (6) shall apply in relation to any person―
(a) who, immediately before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 1985 (65 
of 1985), is a citizen of India;
(b) who was expelled from India before the commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 
1985, under the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946).
(8) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this section, the provisions of this section shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force.]
1
[6B. Special provisions as to citizenship of person covered by proviso to clause (b) of subsection (1) of section 2.—(1) The Central Government or an authority specified by it in this behalf may, 
subject to such conditions, restrictions and manner as may be prescribed, on an application made in this 
behalf, grant a certificate of registration or certificate of naturalisation to a person referred to in the 
proviso to clause (b) of sub-section (1) of section 2.
(2) Subject to fulfillment of the conditions specified in section 5 or the qualifications for 
naturalisation under the provisions of the Third Schedule, a person granted the certificate of registration 
or certificate of naturalisation under sub-section (1) shall be deemed to be a citizen of India from the date 
of his entry into India.
(3) On and from the date of commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2019, any 
proceeding pending against a person under this section in respect of illegal migration or citizenship shall 
stand abated on conferment of citizenship to him:
Provided that such person shall not be disqualified for making application for citizenship under this 
section on the ground that the proceeding is pending against him and the Central Government or authority 
specified by it in this behalf shall not reject his application on that ground if he is otherwise found 
qualified for grant of citizenship under this section:
Provided further that the person who makes the application for citizenship under this section shall not 
be deprived of his rights and privileges to which he was entitled on the date of receipt of his application 
on the ground of making such application.
(4) Nothing in this section shall apply to tribal area of Assam, Meghalaya, Mizoram or Tripura as 
included in the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution and the area covered under “The Inner Line” notified 
under the Bengal Eastern Frontier Regulation, 1873 (Reg. 5 of 1873).]
7. Citizenship by incorporation of territory.―If any territory becomes a part of India, the Central 
Government may, by order notified in the Official Gazette, specify the persons who shall be citizens of 
India by reason of their connection with that territory; and those persons shall be citizens of India as from 
the date to be specified in the order.
2
[OVERSEAS CITIZENSHIP
3
[7A. Registration of Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.―(1) The Central Government may, 
subject to such conditions, restrictions and manner as may be prescribed, on an application made in this 
behalf, register as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder―
(a) any person of full age and capacity,―
(i) who is a citizen of another country, but was a citizen of India at the time of, or at any time 
after the commencement of the Constitution; or
 
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 2019, s. 3 (w.e.f. 10-1-2020).
2. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 7 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2015, s. 4, for sections 7A, 7B, 7C and 7D (w.e.f. 6-1-2015).
9
(ii) who is a citizen of another country, but was eligible to become a citizen of India at the 
time of the commencement of the Constitution; or
(iii) who is a citizen of another country, but belonged to a territory that became part of India 
after the 15th day of August, 1947; or
(iv) who is a child or a grandchild or a great grandchild of such a citizen; or
(b) a person, who is a minor child of a person mentioned in clause (a); or
(c) a person, who is a minor child, and whose both parents are citizens of India or one of the 
parents is a citizen of India; or
(d) spouse of foreign origin of a citizen of India or spouse of foreign origin of an Overseas 
Citizen of India Cardholder registered under section 7A and whose marriage has been registered and 
subsisted for a continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of 
the application under this section:
Provided that for the eligibility for registration as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, such 
spouse shall be subjected to prior security clearance by a competent authority in India:
Provided further that no person, who or either of whose parents or grandparents or great grandparents 
is or had been a citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, shall be eligible for registration as an Overseas Citizen of 
India Cardholder under this sub-section.
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the date from which 
the existing persons of Indian Origin Cardholders shall be deemed to be Overseas Citizens of India 
Cardholders.
Explanation.―For the purposes of this sub-section, “Persons of Indian Origin Cardholders” means 
the persons registered as such under notification number 26011/4/98 F.I., dated the 19th August, 2002, 
issued by the Central Government in this regard.
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section (1), the Central Government may, if it is 
satisfied that special circumstances exist, after recording the circumstances in writing, register a person as 
an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.
7B. Conferment of rights on Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.―(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder 
shall be entitled to such rights, other than the rights specified under sub-section (2), as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.
(2) An Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder shall not be entitled to the rights conferred on a citizen 
of India―
(a) under article 16 of the Constitution with regard to equality of opportunity in matters of public 
employment;
(b) under article 58 of the Constitution for election as President;
(c) under article 66 of the Constitution for election as Vice-President;
(d) under article 124 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the Supreme Court;
(e) under article 217 of the Constitution for appointment as a Judge of the High Court;
(f) under section 16 of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) in regard to 
registration as a voter;
(g) under sections 3 and 4 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) with regard 
to the eligibility for being a member of the House of the People or of the Council of States, as the 
case may be;
10
(h) under sections 5, 5A and section 6 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 (43 of 1951) 
with regard to the eligibility for being a member of the Legislative Assembly or the Legislative 
Council, as the case may be, of a State;
(i) for appointment to public services and posts in connection with affairs of the Union or of any 
State except for appointment in such services and posts as the Central Government may, by special 
order in that behalf, specify.
(3) Every notification issued under sub-section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.
7C. Renunciation of Overseas Citizen of India Card.―(1) If any Overseas Citizen of India 
Cardholder of full age and capacity makes in prescribed manner a declaration renouncing the Card 
registering him as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, the declaration shall be registered by the 
Central Government, and upon such registration, that person shall cease to be an Overseas Citizen of 
India Cardholder.
(2) Where a person ceases to be an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder under sub-section (1), the 
spouse of foreign origin of that person, who has obtained Overseas Citizen of India Card under clause (d) 
of sub-section (1) of section 7A, and every minor child of that person registered as an Overseas Citizen of 
India Cardholder shall thereupon cease to be an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.
7D. Cancellation of registration as Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder.―The Central 
Government may, by order, cancel the registration granted under sub-section (1) of section 7A, if it is 
satisfied that―
(a) the registration as an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder was obtained by means of fraud, 
false representation or the concealment of any material fact; or
(b) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has shown disaffection towards the Constitution, as 
by law established; or
(c) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has, during any war in which India may be engaged, 
unlawfully traded or communicated with an enemy or been engaged in, or associated with, any 
business or commercial activity that was to his knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist an 
enemy in that war; or
(d) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has, within five years after registration under 
sub-section (1) of section 7A, been sentenced to imprisonment for a term of not less than two years; 
or
1
[(da) the Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder has violated any of the provisions of this Act or 
provisions of any other law for time being in force as may be specified by the Central Government in 
the notification published in the Official Gazette; or;]
(e) it is necessary so to do in the interests of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of 
India, friendly relations of India with any foreign country, or in the interests of the general public; or
(f) the marriage of an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder, who has obtained such Card under 
clause (d) of sub-section (1) of section 7A,―
(i) has been dissolved by a competent court of law or otherwise; or
(ii) has not been dissolved but, during the subsistence of such marriage, he has solemnised 
marriage with any other person.]]
1
[Provided that no order under this section shall be passed unless the Overseas Citizen of 
India Cardholder has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.]
 
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 2019, s. 4 (w.e.f. 10-1-2020).
11
TERMINATION OF CITIZENSHIP
8. Renunciation of citizenship.―(1) If any citizen of India of full age and capacity, 1***, makes in 
the prescribed manner a declaration renouncing his Indian Citizenship, the declaration shall be registered 
by the prescribed authority; and, upon such registration, that person shall cease to be a citizen of India:
Provided that if any such declaration is made during any war in which India may be engaged, 
registration thereof shall be withheld until the Central Government otherwise directs.
(2) Where 2[a person] ceases to be a citizen of India under sub-section (1), every minor child of that 
person shall thereupon cease to be a citizen of India:
Provided that any such child may, within one year after attaining full age, make a declaration 3[in the 
prescribed form and manner] that he wishes to resume Indian citizenship and shall thereupon again 
become a citizen of India.
4
* * * * *
9. Termination of citizenship.―(1) Any citizen of India who by naturalisation, registration 
otherwise voluntarily acquires, or has at any time between the 26th January, 1950 and the commencement 
of this Act, voluntarily acquired, the citizenship of another country shall, upon such acquisition or, as the 
case may be, such commencement, cease to be a citizen of India:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to a citizen of India who, during any war in 
which India may be engaged, voluntarily acquires the citizenship of another country, until the Central 
Government otherwise directs.
(2) If any question arises as to whether, when or how any 5[citizen of India] has acquired the 
citizenship of another country, it shall be determined by such authority, in such manner, and having 
regard to such rules of evidence, as may be prescribed in this behalf.
10. Deprivation of citizenship.―(1) A citizen of India who is such by naturalisation or by virtue 
only of clause (c) of article 5 of the Constitution or by registration otherwise than under clause (b)(ii) of 
article 6 of the Constitution or clause (a) of sub-section (1) of section 5 of this Act, shall cease to be a 
citizen of India, if he is deprived of that citizenship by an order of the Central Government under this 
section.
(2) Subject to the provisions of this section, the Central Government may, by order, deprive any such 
citizen of Indian citizenship, if it is satisfied that―
(a) the registration or certificate of naturalisation was obtained by means of fraud, false 
representation or the concealment of any material fact; or
(b) that citizen has shown himself by act or speech to be disloyal or disaffected towards the 
Constitution of India as by law established; or
(c) that citizen has, during any war in which India may be engaged, unlawfully traded or 
communicated with an enemy or been engaged in, or associated with, any business that was to his 
knowledge carried on in such manner as to assist an enemy in that war; or
(d) that citizen has, within five years after registration or naturalisation, been sentenced in any 
country to imprisonment for a term of not less than two years; or
(e) that citizen has been ordinarily resident out of India for a continuous period of seven years, 
and during that period, has neither been at any time a student of any educational institution in a 
country outside India or in the service of a Government in India or of an international organisation of 
 
1. The words “who is also a citizen or national of another country” omitted by Act 6 of 2004, s. 8 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
2. Subs. by Act 39 of 1992, s. 3, for “a male person” (w.e.f. 10-12-1987).
3. Ins. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 8 (w.e.f. 3-12-2014). 
4. Omitted by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “person” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
12
which India is a member, not registered annually in the prescribed manner at an Indian consulate his 
intention to retain his citizenship of India.
(3) The Central Government shall not deprive a person of citizenship under this section unless it is 
satisfied that it is not conducive to the public good that person should continue to be a citizen of India.
(4) Before making an order under this section, the Central Government shall give the person against 
whom the order is proposed to be made notice in writing informing him of the ground on which it is 
proposed to be made and, if the order is proposed to be made on any of the grounds specified in subsection (2) other than clause (e) thereof, of his right, upon making application therefore in the prescribed 
manner, to have his case referred to a committee of inquiry under this section.
(5) If the order is proposed to be made against a person on any of the grounds specified in sub-section 
(2) other than clause (e) thereof and that person so applies in the prescribed manner, the Central 
Government shall, and in any other case it may, refer the case to a Committee of Inquiry consisting of a 
chairman (being a person who has for at least ten years held a judicial office) and two other members 
appointed by the Central Government in this behalf.
(6) The Committee of Inquiry shall, on such reference, hold the inquiry in such manner as may be 
prescribed and submit its report to the Central Government; and the Central Government shall ordinarily 
be guided by such report in making an order under this section.
SUPPLEMENTAL
11. [Commonwealth citizenship.]Omitted by Act The Citizenship (Amendment) Act, (6 of 2004), 
s. 10 (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
12. [Power to confer rights of Indian citizen or citizens of certain country.] Omitted by s. 10, ibid. 
(w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
13. Certificate of Citizenship in case of doubt.―The Central Government may, in such cases as it 
thinks fit, certify that a person with respect to whose citizenship of India a doubt exists, is a citizen of 
India; and a certificate issued under this section shall, unless it is proved that it was obtained by means of 
fraud, false representation or concealment of any material fact, be conclusive evidence that person was 
such a citizen on the date thereof, but without prejudice to any evidence that he was such a citizen at an 
earlier date.
14. Disposal of application under sections 5, 6 and 7A.―(1) The prescribed authority or the 
Central Government may, in its discretion, grant or refuse an application under 1[sections 5, 6 and 
7A] and shall not be required to assign any reasons for such grant or refusal.
(2) Subject to the provisions of section l5 the decision of the prescribed authority or the Central 
Government on any such application as aforesaid shall be final and shall not be called in question in any 
court.
2
[14A. Issue of national identity cards.―(1) The Central Government may compulsorily register 
every citizen of India and issue national identity card to him.
(2) The Central Government may maintain a National Register of Indian Citizens and for that purpose 
establish a National Registration Authority.
(3) On and from the date of commencement of the Citizenship (Amendment) Act, 2003 (6 of 2004), 
the Registrar General, India, appointed under sub-section (1) of section 3 of the Registration of Births and 
Deaths Act, 1969 (18 of 1969) shall act as the National Registration Authority and he shall function as the 
Registrar General of Citizen Registration.
(4) The Central Government may appoint such other officers and staff as may be required to assist the 
Registrar General of Citizen Registration in discharging his functions and responsibilities.
 
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2004, s. 11, for “sections 5 and 6” (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-12-2004).
13
(5) The procedure to be followed in compulsory registration of the citizens of India shall be such as 
may be prescribed.]
15. Revision.―(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under this Act by the prescribed authority 
or any officer or other authority (other than the Central Government) may, within a period of thirty days 
from the date of the order, make an application to the Central Government for a revision of that order:
Provided that the Central Government may entertain the application after the expiry of the said period 
of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application in time.
(2) On receipt of any such application under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, after 
considering the application of the aggrieved person and any report thereon which the officer or authority 
making the order may submit, make such order in relation to the application as it deems fit, and the 
decision of the Central Government shall be final.
1
[15A. Review.―(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Central Government, may, 
within thirty days from the date of such order, make an application for review of such order:
Provided that the Central Government may entertain an application after the expiry of the said period 
of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application in time:
Provided further that an application for a review of an order passed in terms of the provisions of 
section 14A shall be disposed of in the manner provided for in the procedure as may be laid down under 
clause (ia) of sub-section (2) of section 18.
(2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the Central Government shall, make such order 
as it deems fit, and the decis

# laws
URL: http://www.npc.gov.cn/zgrdw/englishnpc/Law/2007-12/13/content_1384056.htm

laws

Nationality Law of the People's Republic of China

(Adopted at the Third Session of the Fifth National People's Congress, promulgated by Order No.8 of the Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress on and effective as of September 10, 1980)

Article 1 This Law is applicable to the acquisition, loss and restoration of nationality of the People's Republic of China.

Article 2 The People's Republic of China is a unitary multinational state; persons belonging to any of the nationalities in China shall have Chinese nationality.

Article 3 The People's Republic of China does not recognize dual nationality for any Chinese national.

Article 4 Any person born in China whose parents are both Chinese nationals or one of whose parents is a Chinese national shall have Chinese nationality.

Article 5 Any person born abroad whose parents are both Chinese nationals or one of whose parents is a Chinese national shall have Chinese nationality. But a person whose parents are both Chinese nationals and have both settled abroad, or one of whose parents is a Chinese national and has settled abroad, and who has acquired foreign nationality at birth shall not have Chinese nationality.

Article 6 Any person born in China whose parents are stateless or of uncertain nationality and have settled in China shall have Chinese nationality.

Article 7 Foreign nationals or stateless persons who are willing to abide by China's Constitution and other laws and who meet one of the following conditions may be naturalized upon approval of their applications:

(1) they are near relatives of Chinese nationals;

(2) they have settled in China; or

(3) they have other legitimate reasons.

Article 8 Any person who applies for naturalization as a Chinese national shall acquire Chinese nationality upon approval of his application; a person whose application for naturalization as a Chinese national has been approved shall not retain foreign nationality.

Article 9 Any Chinese national who has settled abroad and who has been naturalized as a foreign national or has acquired foreign nationality of his own free will shall automatically lose Chinese nationality.

Article 10 Chinese nationals who meet one of the following conditions may renounce Chinese nationality upon approval of their applications:

(1) they are near relatives of foreign nationals;

(2) they have settled abroad; or

(3) they have other legitimate reasons.

Article 11 Any person who applies for renunciation of Chinese nationality shall lose Chinese nationality upon approval of his application.

Article 12 State functionaries and military personnel on active service shall not renounce Chinese nationality.

Article 13 Foreign nationals who once held Chinese nationality may apply for restoration of Chinese nationality if they have legitimate reasons; those whose applications for restoration of Chinese nationality have been approved shall not retain foreign nationality.

Article 14 Persons who wish to acquire, renounce or restore Chinese nationality, with the exception of the cases provided for in Article 9, shall go through the formalities of application. Applications of persons under the age of 18 may be filed on their behalf by their parents or other legal representatives.

Article 15 Nationality applications at home shall be bandled by the public security bureaus of the municipalities or counties where the applicants reside; nationality applications abroad shall be handled by China's diplomatic representative agencies and consular offices.

Article 16 Applications for naturalization as Chinese nationals and for renunciation or restoration of Chinese nationality are subject to examination and approval by the Ministry of Public Security of the People's Republic of China. The Ministry of Public Security shall issue a certificate to any person whose application has been approved.

Article 17 The nationality status of persons who have acquired or lost Chinese nationality before the promulgation of this Law shall remain valid.

Article 18 This Law shall come into force as of the date of its promulgation.

# Ley de Nacionalidad
URL: https://www.diputados.gob.mx/LeyesBiblio/pdf/53.pdf
Author: Cámara de Diputados del H. Congreso de la Unión

1 de 11

LEY DE NACIONALIDAD

Nueva Ley publicada en el Diario Oficial de la Federación el 23 de enero de 1998

TEXTO VIGENTE Última reforma publicada DOF 23-04-2012

Al margen un sello con el Escudo Nacional, que dice: Estados Unidos Mexicanos.- Presidencia de la República.

ERNESTO ZEDILLO PONCE DE LEÓN, Presidente de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, a sus habitantes sabed:

Que el Honorable Congreso de la Unión, se ha servido dirigirme el siguiente

DECRETO

“EL CONGRESO DE LOS ESTADOS UNIDOS MEXICANOS D E C R E T A:

LEY DE NACIONALIDAD

CAPÍTULO I DISPOSICIONES GENERALES

Artículo 1o.- La presente Ley es reglamentaria de los artículos 30, 32 y 37, apartados A y B, de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos. Sus disposiciones son de orden público y de observancia general en todo el territorio nacional. Su aplicación corresponde al Ejecutivo Federal por conducto de la Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores.

Artículo 2o.- Para los efectos de esta Ley, se entenderá por:

I. Secretaría: Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores;

II. Certificado de nacionalidad mexicana: Instrumento jurídico por el cual se reconoce la nacionalidad mexicana por nacimiento y que no se ha adquirido otra nacionalidad;

III. Carta de naturalización: Instrumento jurídico por el cual se acredita el otorgamiento de la nacionalidad mexicana a los extranjeros; y

IV. Extranjero: Aquel que no tiene la nacionalidad mexicana.

Artículo 3o.- Son documentos probatorios de la nacionalidad mexicana, cualquiera de los siguientes:

I. El acta de nacimiento expedida conforme a lo establecido en las disposiciones aplicables;

II. El certificado de nacionalidad mexicana, el cual se expedirá a petición de parte, exclusivamente para los efectos de los artículos 16 y 17 de esta Ley;

III. La carta de naturalización;

2 de 11

IV. El pasaporte;

V. La cédula de identidad ciudadana; y

VI. La matrícula consular que cuente con los siguientes elementos de seguridad:

a) Fotografía digitalizada;

b) Banda magnética, e c) Identificación holográfica.

Fracción adicionada DOF 12-01-2005

VII. A falta de los documentos probatorios mencionados en las fracciones anteriores, se podrá 
acreditar la nacionalidad mediante cualquier elemento que, de conformidad con la ley, lleve a la autoridad 
a la convicción de que se cumplieron los supuestos de atribución de la nacionalidad mexicana. 
Fracción reformada DOF 12-01-2005 (se recorre) 

Artículo 4o.- Independientemente de lo dispuesto en el artículo anterior, la Secretaría podrá exigir al interesado las pruebas adicionales necesarias para comprobar su nacionalidad mexicana, cuando encuentre irregularidades en la documentación presentada. Podrá también hacerlo cuando se requiera verificar la autenticidad de la documentación que la acredite.

Artículo 5o.- Las autoridades federales están obligadas a proporcionar a la Secretaría los informes y certificaciones que ésta les solicite para cumplir con las funciones que esta Ley le encomienda. En el caso de las autoridades estatales y municipales, la Secretaría les solicitará estos informes y certificaciones, con respeto a sus respectivas competencias, cuando las requiera para el cumplimiento de sus funciones materia de esta Ley.

Artículo 6o.- Salvo prueba en contrario, se presume que un mexicano ha adquirido una nacionalidad extranjera, cuando haya realizado un acto jurídico para obtenerla o conservarla, o bien, cuando se ostente como extranjero ante alguna autoridad o en algún instrumento público.

Artículo 7o.- Salvo prueba en contrario, se presume que el niño expósito hallado en territorio nacional ha nacido en éste y que es hijo de padre y madre mexicanos.

Artículo 8o.- Son personas morales de nacionalidad mexicana las que se constituyan conforme a las leyes mexicanas y tengan en el territorio nacional su domicilio legal.

Artículo 9o.- Las personas físicas y morales extranjeras deberán cumplir con lo señalado por el artículo 27 constitucional.

Artículo 10.- El interesado podrá ser representado en los procedimientos a que se refiere esta Ley mediante poder notarial o carta poder firmada ante dos testigos y ratificadas las firmas del otorgante y testigos ante la propia autoridad.

En cualquier caso, cuando la Secretaría lo estime conveniente, el interesado deberá comparecer personalmente.

Artículo 11.- Para todo lo no previsto en esta Ley, se aplicarán supletoriamente las disposiciones del Código Civil para el Distrito Federal en Materia Común y para toda la República en Materia Federal y las de la Ley Federal de Procedimiento Administrativo.

3 de 11

CAPÍTULO II DE LA NACIONALIDAD MEXICANA POR NACIMIENTO

Artículo 12.- Los mexicanos por nacimiento que salgan del territorio nacional o ingresen a él, deberán hacerlo sin excepción, ostentándose como nacionales, aun cuando posean o hayan adquirido otra nacionalidad.

Artículo 13.- Se entenderá que los mexicanos por nacimiento que posean o adquieran otra nacionalidad, actúan como nacionales respecto a:

I. Los actos jurídicos que celebren en territorio nacional y en las zonas en las que el Estado Mexicano ejerza su jurisdicción de acuerdo con el derecho internacional; y

II. Los actos jurídicos que celebren fuera de los límites de la jurisdicción nacional, mediante los cuales:

a) Participen en cualquier proporción en el capital de cualquier persona moral mexicana o entidad constituida u organizada conforme al derecho mexicano, o bien ejerzan el control sobre dichas personas o entidades;

b) Otorguen créditos a una persona o entidad referida en el inciso anterior; y

c) Detenten la titularidad de bienes inmuebles ubicados en territorio nacional u otros derechos cuyo ejercicio se circunscriba al territorio nacional.

Artículo 14.- Tratándose de los actos jurídicos a que se refiere el artículo anterior, no se podrá invocar la protección de un gobierno extranjero. Quien lo haga, perderá en beneficio de la Nación los bienes o cualquier otro derecho sobre los cuales haya invocado dicha protección.

Artículo 15.- En los términos del párrafo segundo del artículo 32 de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, cuando el ejercicio de algún cargo o función se reserve a quien tenga la calidad de mexicano por nacimiento y no haya adquirido otra nacionalidad, será necesario que la disposición aplicable así lo señale expresamente.

Artículo 16.- Los mexicanos por nacimiento a los que otro Estado considere como sus nacionales, deberán presentar el certificado de nacionalidad mexicana, cuando pretendan acceder al ejercicio de algún cargo o función para el que se requiera ser mexicano por nacimiento y que no adquieran otra nacionalidad. Al efecto, las autoridades correspondientes deberán exigir a los interesados la presentación de dicho certificado.

En el caso de que durante el desempeño del cargo o función adquieran otra nacionalidad, cesarán inmediatamente en sus funciones.

Artículo 17.- Los mexicanos por nacimiento a los que otro Estado considere como sus nacionales, podrán solicitar a la Secretaría el certificado de nacionalidad mexicana, únicamente para los efectos del artículo anterior.

Para ello, formularán renuncia expresa a la nacionalidad que les sea atribuida, a toda sumisión, obediencia y fidelidad a cualquier Estado extranjero, especialmente de aquél que le atribuya la otra nacionalidad, a toda protección extraña a las leyes y autoridades mexicanas, y a todo derecho que los tratados o convenciones internacionales concedan a los extranjeros. Asimismo, protestarán adhesión, obediencia y sumisión a las leyes y autoridades mexicanas y se abstendrán de realizar cualquier conducta que implique sumisión a un Estado extranjero.

4 de 11

El certificado de nacionalidad mexicana se expedirá una vez que el interesado haya cumplido con los requisitos de esta Ley y su reglamento.

Artículo 18.- La Secretaría declarará, previa audiencia del interesado, la nulidad del certificado cuando se hubiera expedido en violación de esta Ley o de su reglamento, o cuando dejen de cumplirse los requisitos previstos en ellos.

La declaratoria de nulidad fijará la fecha a partir de la cual el certificado será nulo. En todo caso, se dejarán a salvo las situaciones jurídicas creadas durante la vigencia del certificado a favor de terceros de buena fe.

CAPÍTULO III DE LA NACIONALIDAD MEXICANA POR NATURALIZACIÓN

Artículo 19.- El extranjero que pretenda naturalizarse mexicano deberá:

I. Presentar solicitud a la Secretaría en la que manifieste su voluntad de adquirir la nacionalidad mexicana;

II. Formular las renuncias y protesta a que se refiere el artículo 17 de este ordenamiento;

La Secretaría no podrá exigir que se formulen tales renuncias y protestas sino hasta que se haya tomado la decisión de otorgar la nacionalidad al solicitante. La carta de naturalización se otorgará una vez que se compruebe que éstas se han verificado.

III. Probar que sabe hablar español, conoce la historia del país y está integrado a la cultura nacional; y

IV. Acreditar que ha residido en territorio nacional por el plazo que corresponda conforme al artículo 20 de esta Ley.

Para el correcto cumplimiento de los requisitos a que se refiere este artículo, se estará a lo dispuesto en el reglamento de esta Ley.

Artículo 20.- El extranjero que pretenda naturalizarse mexicano deberá acreditar que ha residido en territorio nacional cuando menos durante los últimos cinco años inmediatos anteriores a la fecha de su solicitud, salvo lo dispuesto en las fracciones siguientes:

I. Bastará una residencia de dos años inmediatamente anteriores a la fecha de la solicitud cuando el interesado:

a) Sea descendiente en línea recta de un mexicano por nacimiento;

Quedarán exentos de comprobar la residencia que establece la fracción I, aquellos descendientes en línea recta en segundo grado de un mexicano por nacimiento, siempre que no cuente con otra nacionalidad al momento de la solicitud; o bien no le sean reconocidos los derechos adquiridos a partir de su nacimiento;

Párrafo adicionado DOF 23-04-2012 b) Tenga hijos mexicanos por nacimiento;

c) Sea originario de un país latinoamericano o de la Península Ibérica, o

5 de 11

d) A juicio de la Secretaría, haya prestado servicios o realizado obras destacadas en materia cultural, social, científica, técnica, artística, deportiva o empresarial que beneficien a la Nación. En casos excepcionales, a juicio del Titular del Ejecutivo Federal, no será necesario que el extranjero acredite la residencia en el territorio nacional a que se refiere esta fracción.

II. La mujer o el varón extranjeros que contraigan matrimonio con varón o mujer mexicanos, deberán acreditar que han residido y vivido de consuno en el domicilio conyugal establecido en territorio nacional, durante los dos años inmediatamente anteriores a la fecha de la solicitud.

No será necesario que el domicilio conyugal se establezca en territorio nacional, cuando el cónyuge mexicano radique en el extranjero por encargo o comisión del Gobierno Mexicano.

En el caso de matrimonios celebrados entre extranjeros, la adquisición de la nacionalidad mexicana por uno de los cónyuges con posterioridad al matrimonio, permitirá al otro obtener dicha nacionalidad, siempre que reúna los requisitos que exige esta fracción, y

III. Bastará una residencia de un año inmediato anterior a la solicitud, en el caso de adoptados, así como de menores descendientes hasta segundo grado, sujetos a la patria potestad de mexicanos.

Si los que ejercen la patria potestad no hubieren solicitado la naturalización de sus adoptados o de los menores, éstos podrán hacerlo dentro del año siguiente contado a partir de su mayoría de edad, en los términos de esta fracción.

La Carta de Naturalización producirá sus efectos al día siguiente de su expedición.

Artículo 21.- Las ausencias temporales del país no interrumpirán la residencia, salvo que éstas se presenten durante los dos años anteriores a la presentación de la solicitud y excedan en total seis meses. La residencia a que se refiere la fracción III del artículo anterior, deberá ser ininterrumpida.

Artículo 22.- Quien adquiera la nacionalidad mexicana conforme a los supuestos del artículo 20, fracción II de esta Ley, la conservará aun después de disuelto el vínculo matrimonial, salvo en el caso de nulidad del matrimonio, imputable al naturalizado.

Artículo 23.- En todos los casos de naturalización, la Secretaría recabará previamente la opinión de la Secretaría de Gobernación.

Artículo 24.- El procedimiento para la obtención de la carta de naturalización se suspenderá cuando al solicitante se le haya decretado auto de formal prisión o de sujeción a proceso en México, o sus equivalentes en el extranjero.

Artículo 25.- No se expedirá carta de naturalización cuando el solicitante se encuentre en cualquiera de los siguientes supuestos:

I. No cumplir con los requisitos que establece esta Ley;

II. Estar extinguiendo una sentencia privativa de la libertad por delito doloso en México o en el extranjero, y

III. Cuando no sea conveniente a juicio de la Secretaría, en cuyo caso deberá fundar y motivar su decisión.

Artículo 26.- La Secretaría declarará, previa audiencia del interesado, la nulidad de la carta de naturalización cuando se hubiere expedido sin cumplir con los requisitos o con violación a esta Ley.

6 de 11

La declaratoria de nulidad fijará la fecha a partir de la cual dicha carta será nula. En todo caso se dejarán a salvo las situaciones jurídicas creadas durante la vigencia de la carta a favor de terceros de buena fe.

CAPÍTULO IV DE LA PÉRDIDA DE LA NACIONALIDAD MEXICANA POR NATURALIZACIÓN

Artículo 27.- La nacionalidad mexicana por naturalización, previa audiencia del interesado, se pierde de conformidad con lo que establece el artículo 37, apartado B, de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos.

Artículo 28.- Las autoridades y fedatarios públicos están obligados a comunicar a la Secretaría aquellos casos en que tengan conocimiento de que un mexicano por naturalización se encuentre en alguno de los supuestos del artículo 37, apartado B, de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos.

Dicho aviso deberá realizarse dentro de los cuarenta días hábiles siguientes, contados a partir de la fecha de que se tuvo conocimiento de los hechos mencionados.

Artículo 29.- La pérdida de la nacionalidad mexicana por naturalización exclusivamente afectará a la persona sobre la cual recaiga la resolución respectiva.

Artículo 30.- La adopción no entraña para el adoptado ni para el adoptante la adquisición o pérdida de la nacionalidad. Ello sin perjuicio de lo dispuesto en el artículo 20 fracción III de esta Ley.

Artículo 31.- En todos los casos de pérdida de la nacionalidad mexicana por naturalización, la Secretaría recabará previamente la opinión de la Secretaría de Gobernación.

Artículo 32.- Cuando se den los supuestos de pérdida de la nacionalidad mexicana, la Secretaría, previa audiencia del interesado, revocará la carta de naturalización.

CAPÍTULO V DE LAS INFRACCIONES Y SANCIONES ADMINISTRATIVAS

Artículo 33.- Las infracciones administrativas previstas en la presente Ley, se sancionarán con lo siguiente:

I. Se impondrá multa de trescientos a quinientos salarios, a quien ingrese o salga de territorio nacional en contravención a lo dispuesto por el artículo 12 de esta Ley;

II. Se impondrá multa de cuatrocientos a ochocientos salarios:

a) A quien realice las renuncias y protesta en forma fraudulenta o cometa actos que pongan de manifiesto su incumplimiento;

b) A quien intente obtener cualesquiera de las pruebas de nacionalidad mexicana que corresponde expedir a la Secretaría con violación de las prevenciones de esta Ley o su reglamento, o presentando ante dicha Secretaría información, testigos, documentos o certificados falsos.

Si se llegare a obtener la prueba de nacionalidad, se duplicará la sanción, y

7 de 11

c) A quien haga uso de una prueba de nacionalidad falsificada o alterada;

III. Se impondrá multa de quinientos a dos mil salarios, a quien contraiga matrimonio con el único objeto de obtener la nacionalidad mexicana. Igual sanción se impondrá al cónyuge mexicano que, conociendo dicho propósito, celebre el matrimonio.

Artículo 34.- En los casos no previstos en el artículo anterior, se impondrá multa de hasta mil salarios a quien cometa cualquier infracción administrativa a la presente Ley o a su reglamento.

Artículo 35.- Para los efectos de este capítulo, por salario se entiende el salario mínimo diario general vigente en el Distrito Federal al momento de cometerse la infracción.

Artículo 36.- Las multas previstas en este capítulo se aplicarán sin perjuicio de que la Secretaría, previa audiencia al interesado, deje sin efectos el documento que se hubiere expedido, así como de las sanciones penales que en su caso procedan.

Artículo 37.- Para la imposición de las sanciones, la Secretaría deberá tomar en cuenta la gravedad de la infracción, los daños y perjuicios causados, al igual que los antecedentes, circunstancias personales y situación socioeconómica del infractor.

TRANSITORIOS

PRIMERO.- La presente Ley entrará en vigor el 20 de marzo de 1998.

SEGUNDO.- Se abroga la Ley de Nacionalidad publicada en el Diario Oficial de la Federación el 21 de junio de 1993 y se derogan todas las disposiciones que se opongan a la presente Ley.

TERCERO.- Las cartas y declaratorias de naturalización, los certificados de nacionalidad mexicana por nacimiento, así como los de recuperación de nacionalidad, expedidos por la Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores con anterioridad a la entrada en vigor de esta Ley, seguirán surtiendo sus efectos jurídicos.

CUARTO.- Para beneficiarse de lo dispuesto por el artículo 37, apartado A de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, el interesado deberá:

I. Presentar solicitud por escrito a la Secretaría de Relaciones Exteriores, Embajadas o Consulados Mexicanos, en cualquier tiempo;

Fracción reformada DOF 02-12-2004

II. Acreditar su derecho a la nacionalidad mexicana, conforme lo establece esta Ley; y

III. Acreditar plenamente su identidad ante la autoridad.

QUINTO.- Los nacidos y concebidos con anterioridad a la entrada en vigor del Decreto por el que se reforman los artículos 30, 32 y 37 de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, estarán sujetos a lo dispuesto por los artículos Segundo y Tercero Transitorios del citado Decreto.

Para los efectos del párrafo anterior, se presumirán concebidos los nacidos vivos y viables dentro de los trescientos días posteriores a la entrada en vigor de esta Ley.

8 de 11

México, D.F., a 12 de diciembre de 1997.- Sen. Heladio Ramírez López, Presidente.- Dip. Luis Meneses Murillo, Presidente.- Sen. José Antonio Valdivia, Secretario.- Dip. Angelina Muñoz Fernández, Secretario.- Rúbricas."

En cumplimiento de lo dispuesto por la fracción I del Artículo 89 de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, y para su debida publicación y observancia, expido el presente Decreto en la residencia del Poder Ejecutivo Federal, en la Ciudad de México, Distrito Federal, a los treinta días del mes de diciembre de mil novecientos noventa y siete.- Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de León.- Rúbrica.- El Secretario de Gobernación, Emilio Chuayffet Chemor.- Rúbrica.

9 de 11

ARTÍCULOS TRANSITORIOS DE DECRETOS DE REFORMA

DECRETO por el que se reforma el artículo cuarto transitorio de la Ley de Nacionalidad.

Publicado en el Diario Oficial de la Federación el 2 de diciembre de 2004

ARTICULO UNICO.- Se reforma la fracción primera del Artículo Cuarto Transitorio de la Ley de Nacionalidad, para quedar como sigue:

 ... 

TRANSITORIO

ARTICULO UNICO.- El presente Decreto entrará en vigor al día siguiente de su publicación en el Diario Oficial de la Federación.

México, D.F., a 28 de octubre de 2004.- Sen. Diego Fernández de Cevallos Ramos, Presidente.- Dip. Manlio Fabio Beltrones Rivera, Presidente.- Sen. Sara I. Castellanos Cortés, Secretaria.- Dip. Graciela Larios Rivas, Secretaria.- Rúbricas."

En cumplimiento de lo dispuesto por la fracción I del Artículo 89 de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos y para su debida publicación y observancia, expido el presente Decreto en la Residencia del Poder Ejecutivo Federal, en la Ciudad de México, Distrito Federal, a los veintiséis días del mes de noviembre de dos mil cuatro.- Vicente Fox Quesada.- Rúbrica.- El Secretario de Gobernación, Santiago Creel Miranda.- Rúbrica.

10 de 11

DECRETO por el que se adiciona la Ley de Nacionalidad.

Publicado en el Diario Oficial de la Federación el 12 de enero de 2005

ARTÍCULO ÚNICO.- Se adiciona la fracción VI, pasando la actual a ser la fracción VII, al artículo 3 de la Ley de Nacionalidad, para quedar como sigue:

 ... 

TRANSITORIO

Único.- El presente Decreto entrará en vigor el día siguiente de su publicación en el Diario Oficial de la Federación.

México, D.F., a 7 de diciembre de 2004.- Dip. Manlio Fabio Beltrones Rivera, Presidente.- Sen. Diego Fernández de Cevallos Ramos, Presidente.- Dip. Marcos Morales Torres, Secretario.- Sen. Sara I. Castellanos Cortés, Secretaria.- Rúbricas."

En cumplimiento de lo dispuesto por la fracción I del Artículo 89 de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos y para su debida publicación y observancia, expido el presente Decreto en la Residencia del Poder Ejecutivo Federal, en la Ciudad de México, Distrito Federal, a los diez días del mes de enero de dos mil cinco.- Vicente Fox Quesada.- Rúbrica.- El Secretario de Gobernación, Santiago Creel Miranda.- Rúbrica.

11 de 11

DECRETO por el que se adiciona un segundo párrafo al inciso a) de la fracción I del artículo 20 de la Ley de Nacionalidad.

Publicado en el Diario Oficial de la Federación el 23 de abril de 2012

Artículo Único.- Se adiciona un segundo párrafo al inciso a) de la fracción I del artículo 20 de la Ley de Nacionalidad, para quedar como sigue:

………

TRANSITORIOS

Primero.- El presente Decreto entrará en vigor al día siguiente de su publicación en el Diario Oficial de la Federación.

Segundo.- El Ejecutivo Federal, contará con un plazo de 45 días para realizar las adecuaciones al Reglamento de la Ley, con el objetivo de garantizar la viabilidad y aplicación del presente Decreto.

México, D.F., a 8 de marzo de 2012.- Dip. Guadalupe Acosta Naranjo, Presidente.- Sen. José González Morfín, Presidente.- Dip. Guadalupe Perez Dominguez, Secretaria.- Sen. Arturo Herviz Reyes, Secretario.- Rúbricas."

En cumplimiento de lo dispuesto por la fracción I del Artículo 89 de la Constitución Política de los Estados Unidos Mexicanos, y para su debida publicación y observancia, expido el presente Decreto en la Residencia del Poder Ejecutivo Federal, en la Ciudad de México, Distrito Federal, a diecinueve de abril de dos mil doce.- Felipe de Jesús Calderón Hinojosa.- Rúbrica.- El Secretario de Gobernación, Alejandro Alfonso Poiré Romero.- Rúbrica.